# CarettaBMS cell voltage measurement

The voltage measurement is heavily **cost-optimized**. Optimization was enabled
due to some of the options offered by the processors ADC. For cell voltage
measurement no external components are required. Although to achieve the
performance needed, this measurement method required some additional software
solutions.

## ADC configuration

The processor has a 10-bit analog-to-digital converter (ADC) and some voltage
references. The voltage references are not very accurate, but they are stable,
which is important. During the production, it is necessary to calibrate the
modules, so the exact value of the voltage reference is known. Typically, an ADC
is used by connecting a voltage reference to its reference input and an unknown
voltage, we want to measure, to its input. The input voltage we want to measure
must always be lower than the reference voltage. In this case, the reference
voltage used has an output of 1.5V, because it is the only available reference
in the entire processor's power supply range. If this reference voltage were to
be connected to the ADC's reference input, the maximum allowed voltage at the
input would be less than 1.5V. There lies our problem as we want to measure the
voltage range between 1.8V and 5V. The problem could be resolved by using a
voltage divider at the ADC's input, but this solution is not acceptable as it
has two major drawbacks. Due to the voltage divider, we would introduce
additional static energy consumption, undesirable in battery applications.
Although this could still be mitigated in some way by using a larger values
resistors to limit the current. I think the bigger problem is the cost that two
additional resistors would contribute too. The voltage measurement must be
accurate to at least Â±10mV and the resistors needed to achieve that accuracy are
expensive. All of this led me to a different, lesser-known approach of using an
ADC. Instead of connecting the reference voltage to the ADC reference input,
cell voltage was connected to it. In the case of CarettaBMS, this is also the
supply voltage of the processor. This now means that any voltage in the range
between 0V and the processor supply can be measured at the ADCs input. It would
make sense to connect a known value to the input, such as a voltage reference of
1.5V. The voltage will always be lower than the processor's power supply. This
way of measuring has been used many times but is not well known and it's not
common. The important thing is that ADC always operates within its own operating
parameters.

## ADC resolution

As this ADC configuration use is not widespread or well documented, there is no
data on the accuracy and resolution of the measurement. For a BMS, these two are
crucial. We need to take a closer look at the equations that describe how the
ADC works. Of particular importance is the resolution of the measurement, which
turns out to have a significant nonlinear dependence on the cell voltage.

Below equation typically describes the operation of the ADC and is often used to
convert the ADC output data back to the input voltage:

<img src="https://latex.codecogs.com/svg.latex?U_{in} = n \cdot
  \frac{U_{ref}}{2^m}"/>

We assume that the reference voltage V<sub>ref</sub> is a constant and we have a
constant number of ADC bits (m). Only the ADC result (n) remains in the
equation. This gives the classical linear equation, whit the linear dependence
of the ADC result on the input voltage. We can also quickly recognize the
resolution of the ADC, which is given as a fraction of the reference voltage or
U<sub>ref</sub> / 2^m. Due to the unusual ADC configuration, where the
quantities at the inputs of the ADC are swapped, we need to do the same in the
previous equation. We get a new equation that describes the operation of the ADC
in the current configuration:

<img src="https://latex.codecogs.com/svg.latex?U_{ref} = n \cdot
  \frac{U_{in}}{2^m}"/>

We would prefer to rearrange the new equation to be more like the first one
because we want to calculate U<sub>in</sub> from the ADC result:

<img src="https://latex.codecogs.com/svg.latex?U_{in} = \frac{U_{ref} \cdot
  2^m}{n}"/>

By the same analysis as we performed on the first equation, we can replace
U<sub>ref</sub> and m by constants. The measured voltage no longer has a linear
dependence on the ADC result. The equation no longer shows us the ADC resolution
as the first equation did. Now, the path to the equation that describes the
ADC resolution is much more difficult as the resolution changes. The resolution
depends on the cell voltage. Briefly, we would summarize that the larger the
difference between the reference voltage and the cell voltage, the lower the
resolution. To facilitate the derivation of the equation, a simple mathematical
model of the ADC was developed, where the two input quantities were replaced
([model](https://www.desmos.com/calculator/vjn2ooxamo)). The model has
contributed greatly to a better understanding of ADC performance. The conclusion
is that the resolution of the ADC is equal to the difference between the next
ADC result, when we increase the voltage, and the current result. This is also
described by the next equation:

 <img src="https://latex.codecogs.com/svg.latex?ADC_{res} = \underbrace{
  \frac{U_{ref} \cdot 2^m}{n-1}}_{\textrm{next result}} -
  \underbrace{\frac{U_{ref} \cdot 2^m}{n}}_{\textrm{current result}}"/>

We further transform the equation to obtain a single fraction. This gives the
equation:

<img src="https://latex.codecogs.com/svg.latex?ADC_{res} = \frac{U_{ref} \cdot
  2^m}{n^2 - n}"/>

This equation describes how the resolution changes depending on the ADC result.
To express the resolution of the ADC as a function of the input voltage
U<sub>in</sub>, we replace the ADC result (n) in the equation with the second
equation. In doing so, we must take into account the property of the quantizer
and the ADC result is always a natural number or 0. This is achieved with the
floor function and an additional offset factor (o) that defines the operation of
the ADC around the result 0. This factor can be 0 or 0.5. In this case, the
offset factor is 0.

 <img src="https://latex.codecogs.com/svg.latex?ADC_{res} = \frac{U_{ref} \cdot
  2^m}{\left\lfloor \frac{U_{ref} \cdot 2^m}{U_{in}} + o \right\rfloor^2 -
  \left\lfloor \frac{U_{ref} \cdot 2^m}{U_{in}} + o \right\rfloor}"/>

When all parameters are inserted into the equation, it turns out that the ADC
does not have a sufficient number of bits to achieve the sufficient resolution
and consequently the accuracy specified in the requirements. However, the use of
ADC in the described configuration was chosen because the cost is very
important. In this configuration, no external components are required. The
resolution problem was later solved in the program by oversampling the ADC, thus
achieving the required measurement resolution.

## Resolution plot

![resolution plot](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Hrastovc/CarettaBMS/gh-pages/images/resolution.png)
